[RAC] Fix two bugs, improve documentation and add more tests (#1709)
acl2/acl2: books/projects/rac/HACKING.md

AST
---

> All the nodes have a NodesID used for the visitor dispatch. When a new a new
> AST node is added, astnodes.def and visitor.h/hxx must always be updated.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All the nodes have a NodesID used for the visitor dispatch. When a new
AST node is added, astnodes.def and visitor.h/hxx must always be updated.
```

the translation and checks should be implemented in separate passes using the
vistor provided (program/process/process/visitor.h).

> To create to new pass, assertions.h and astdumper.h/cpp can be used as example.
> With visitor.h documentation, they should be enough to understand how to use it.
> As Clans's RecursiveASTVisitor inspired greatly this visitor, clang's
> documentation [3][4] can be interresting to look at. After all this reading,
> the next step to understand the visitor, is to practice by writing an easy
> visitor printing when visiting a node and then writing a visitor to print the
> AST (in dot, ascii, ...).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To create to new pass, the documentation in visitor.h, and the assertions.h and 
astdumper.h/cpp examples can be useful references.
This visitor is greatly inspired by Clang's RecursiveASTVisitor, and as such Clang's
documentation [3][4] can be useful as well. After all this reading,
the next step to understand the visitor, is to practice by writing an easy
visitor printing when visiting a node and then writing a visitor to print the
AST (in dot, ascii, ...).
```

Instead of returning `false` when an error is detected, the error() function,
provided in returnfalse.h should be used (this is how error bypass works).

When modifying the AST, program/parser/ast/astnodes.def and the visitor

> traversal MUST be updated (in visitor.hxx). Be carefull to not add loops or

Reviewer: ```suggestion
traversal MUST be updated (in visitor.hxx). Be careful to not add loops or
```

> multiple pass on the same nodes. Also, check if the leafs are still leafs, if
> not, it changes the traversal.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
multiple pass on the same nodes. Also, check if the leaves are still leaves, if
not, it changes the traversal.
```

> For now, those pass are applied (in this order):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Currently, these pass are applied (in this order):
```

  types reference manual (especially the section 2.3) and cppreference.

* RacConstraints and ForConstraints: Those contains the extra checks enabled by
  -pedantic. They help ensuring that the translation is correct by avoiding
  undefined behaviors (for example a variable defined but not initialized) or
  things translate.lisp/acl2 can't use or prove (like a for loop which
  termination can't be proven).

* MarkAssertions: This step is the pass where the benefit of the visitor are
  the most obvious. This step search for every assertions and set, as error
  message, the name of the parent functions. In the older version of the parser,
  there was a function (markAssertion) defined for every node. This function
  was only doing the traversal of the AST and forward the function name except
  for the Assertion node in which the name is set. This meant, adding a
  "simple" action on only two nodes (functions definition and assertion)
  implied reimplementing the full traversal everywhere. With
  RecursiveASTVisitor, it is only 30 lines of code (without the boilerplate,
  there are only 3 lines of logic).

Code generation
---------------

> The parser goal is to generate a partially translated AST usable by the Lisp

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The parser's goal is to generate a partially translated AST usable by the Lisp
```

script. The parser will translate expression in Lisp but the program stays
imperative (for example, the program still contains for loops).

SExpression are generated by the ACL2Expr() functions and are implemented for
all AST nodes (see under program/parser/ast/, expression.[cpp,h],
statement.[cpp,h] and functions.[cpp,h]). Those functions are recursive: by
running ACL2Expr() on each roots, the full translation is generated (in
practice, the AST is composed of several trees, one for each functions/constant.
The root itself is not a "true" AST node. This is not elegant and one day, it
will change).

> The cast translation is the hardest part of the parser. Cast are handle in two

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The cast translation is the hardest part of the parser. Cast are handled in two
```

> stages: during the typing phase, every nodes are typed (types need to be

Reviewer: ```suggestion
stages: during the typing phase, every node is typed (types need to be
```

resolved before casting). Then, cast are translate in the ACL2Expr() functions
using the type information determined before. An example of cast can be found

> in statement.cpp at line 376 (assignment). The actual cast logic is handle in

Reviewer: ```suggestion
in statement.cpp at line 376 (assignment). The actual cast logic is handled in
```

types.cpp.

They are separated in two cases: when it is an actual cast (for example: a
large value is assigned in a smaller storage or when a value is casted with an
explicit cast). The other, the "false" cast, are used for translating operation
(for example: when shifting an unsigned int the correct translation is

> (bits a n)), where the cast logic even is reused. As example of the second

Reviewer: ```suggestion
(bits a n)), where the cast logic is reused. As example of the second
```

set in the yaml.

By default, the parser will be compile in release mode (with all optimisation
and without the debuging symbols), to  debug use 'make debug' instead.

> For more in depth debuging, the -dump-ast option is really usefull to understand

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For more in depth debuging, the -dump-ast option is really useful to understand
```

what's happening. By running `./bin/parse file.cpp -dump-ast > ast.dot`, the
parser prints the AST in dot [1]. Then to convert it to an image using either
by running `dot -T png ast.dot > ast.png` or one of the many online visualizers
(like [2]). For now, it only display the name of the nodes and the expression's

> types. This is very useful to learn how the parser translate program, learning

Reviewer: ```suggestion
types. This is very useful to learn how the parser translates a program, learning
```

the AST "shapes" and also, since it has the type info, it helps debugging

> type/cast issues. Note, the dot dump works but is still limited: some usefull
> features or info are probably missing. This is not a "real" feature so, only it
> is kept minimalistic. Fell free to add more information as needed (It is also a
> super exercice to test and learn how to use the ASTRecursiveVisitor !).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
type/cast issues. Note, the dot dump works but is still limited: some useful
features or info are probably missing. This is not a "real" feature so it
is kept minimalistic. Feel free to add more information as needed (It is also a
super exercise to test and learn how to use the ASTRecursiveVisitor !).
```
